---
layout: post
title: "Local citizens"
author: "Ammar Plumber"
category: "AC"
---

A prominent topic in development economics is the phenomenon of human capital flight or _brain drain_. People are raised and educated in their motherland and then take their talents to a place that can better reward their efforts, like LeBron James going to Miami. This isn't inherently a problem. Immigration, on the whole, seems to benefit both countries&mdash;receiving and exporting. Receiving countries receive valuable talent, and exporting countries receive remittances, trade opportunities, and return migrants with an array of skills and resources acquired during their time abroad. A few relevant papers include [Khanna & Morales, 2017](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2968147); [Batista et al., 2012](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304387811000083?via%3Dihub); [Easterly and Nyarko, 2008](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1121853).

I used the LeBron example both because I'm an NBA fan and found the entire episode quite hilarious but also because I want to draw attention to the phenomenon of human capital flight _within America_. LeBron is basically the best case scenario for a city like Cleveland; LeBron learned how to win alongside his two co-stars and Pat Riley, returned to Cleveland, and defeated a historically good Warriors team to deliver Cleveland's first NBA title. Most importantly, he's invested millions into community-building projects in Cleveland. Granted, the man has probably squandered tons of money on all kinds of other indulgences as well. But I'd bet that he will invest even more as he ages. The strength of his personal brand, a consequence of his success as a player, will only aid these efforts.

Again, LeBron is the best case scenario. Along with this anecdotal optimism, I have some fears. I fear that today's youth, in their profound mobility, also have a profound sense of indifference toward their hometowns. Most Penn graduates I've encountered covet jobs in New York City, San Francisco (mostly just those two, but I'll list a couple more), Los Angeles, DC, Chicago, and Austin. Many will start families in or near those cities. Senator Mike Lee commissioned a [report](https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/republicans/2019/4/losing-our-minds-brain-drain-across-the-united-states) on this, which contains an interactive map of US states.


So what? Maybe those are just better places to live, and an influx of talent is a fair reward for having good institutions.

Two replies:

First&mdash;is it desirable to have a few overpopulated thriving cities as opposed to many smaller cities? I do not undertake to answer this now.

Second&mdash;yes, that may be true, but many people will remain in those other places without the pedigree or funds to go elsewhere. Indeed, [Raj Chetty writes](https://opportunityinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/movers_paper1.pdf) about the notion of [_zipcode destiny_](https://www.npr.org/2018/11/12/666993130/zipcode-destiny-the-persistent-power-of-place-and-education). The neighborhood you grow up in is one of the strongest predictors of your earning potential, college attendance rates, and marriage/reproductive behavior. Exposure to the right individuals and communities can change a child's life. So are we obligated to bring our knowledge, resources, and connections back home? Fundamental to the question of obligation is the question of identity. To some extent, we feel obligated towards what we consider part of ourselves. We cannot abandon our families and friends because those people care about us and invested their thoughts and energy into us. At minimum, they shaped us into who we are. Perhaps that awareness is weaker when it comes to cities. Or perhaps the connection to one's city is not intrinsically weak, but we fail to cultivate it by means of ongoing engagement, discussion, and thought. This can happen with friends and family too&mdash;those we've lost touch with. My intuition emphasizes this latter explanation. 

I grew up in Dallas and developed a deep investment in the city over the course of high school. Most prominently, this was due to all of the people in this city who were invested in me: my family, my teachers, my friends, my debate coach, and many others. But I also deepened my investment in the city through engagement&mdash;primarily volunteer work. One misconception is that volunteer work is a one-sided engagement; I invest effort into helping others, and others benefit from my investment. This isn't how I experienced it. In addition to those I served, I also worked with program administrators, the St. Mark's community service board directors, faculty members who signed up to drive students, and other volunteers. Their efforts were a kind of investment in me. By appointing me to lead our efforts with the New Beginning Center, the community service board leadership entrusted me with a position of importance&mdash;one that rewarded me with leadership experience and perspective. And frankly, it was also something I could add to my resume.

So too did I experience a bilateral connection with those I served. When tutoring kids or playing bingo with the homeless, I enjoyed the feelings of importance, flow, and affinity. Many of those kids I only worked with a handful of times, but, in aggregate, the people of Dallas have shaped me.

This connection weakened as I spent four years of my young adulthood in other cities, where instead of [Dallasites](https://www.dmagazine.com/frontburner/2012/01/are-we-dallasites-or-dallasonians-fort-worthers-or-fort-worthians-etymology-tells-us-who-we-are/) investing in me, it was Philadelphians, Brits, and others. I have spent some time pondering getting a Ph.D. in England and pursuing an academic career there. I don't necessarily think living and working elsewhere is mutually exclusive with engagement with Dallas, but it would certainly make it harder and likely less rewarding.

Last year, I heard a podcast from the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab [J-PAL](https://www.povertyactionlab.org/page/j-pal-voices-impact-and-promise-summer-jobs-united-states) that suggested COVID-19 may have put people back in touch with their hometowns, as many opted to reside there until work/school resumed in person. This was certainly true for me. Whether I return or take my talents to South Beach, the fine city of Dallas will one day reap what it sowed&mdash;whatever the hell remains of my modest salary. Jokes aside, I hope to increase my investment in Dallas, starting with my thoughts and discussions.

<em>Ammar Plumber is editor of </em> Resonant notes.